When participants are not painting, the robot's built in Artificial Intelligence algorithms will take over and paint.  Over the years I have written and experimented with multiple AI algorithms.  Most have been unimpressive, some have been disasterous, but one has stood out as being really useful. This AI algorithm is called K-Means Clustering.

Where a human sees the trace image and uses it to plan the next brush strokes, the robot's AI begins its planning by running the trace image through the K-Means Clustering algorithm.  The algorithm reduces and clusters the different colors in the image to groups of paintable areas.  It does this by comparing the means of 5 values in each pixel (red, green, blue, x, and y) to each and every other pixel.  It then groups all like pixels into collections.  An average of the 5 means is then calculated for each collection and each pixel is re-evaluated and put into the collection it best matches.  This process is repeated until equilibrium is reached and all pixels find the collection they are most like.  It is a sophisticated color reduction algorithm that simplifies the canvas so that the robot may more easily plot paths through the clusters of colors that naturally emerge.

Other algorithms that have had limited success but will be re-introduced include a routine that compares an image of the work in progress to the image being traced.  This algorithm searches for large differences in lightness and darkness and attempts to automatically correct them.  This is beyond the typical AI in that it approaches the realm of an artificial simulation of creativity.  In this scenario the robot is actually responding to its own brush strokes and using them as its own feedback - a feedback loop.  Some have argued that over the course of painting a portrait, a human artist is processing multiple feedback loops in the exact same manner.

When it comes to priorotizing the AI, we want it to be secondary to human participants.  We would prefer for it to concentrate on backgrounds and areas that may be uninteresting to humans.  The two aforementioned algorithms could be limited to this role.  Furthermore, when a human provides brushstrokes, we would immediately give them precedence over any AI contributions.